#summary Tutorial Lesson: Loading and changing electron density map displays

= Tutorial Lesson: Loading and changing electron density map displays

This lesson introduces some of the mechanisms for loading and adjusting the display of electron density maps.

  # Copy files automation_out.pdb, bng_mlmap.fcf and bng_milaunch.mlw from the examples directory of your MIFit installation into a new directory. These files are a coordinate file, a file of phased x-ray data and a MIFit session file for loading the coordinates and data.
  # Use the *File/Open models, data, maps, etc...* command to load the file bng_milaunch.mlw from the directory (1) in which it was placed. You should see the electron density map appear around the protein model in the main canvas. Note that space group and cell information (beside the crystal icon) are read from input coordinate file for the model. Similarly, this information is read from the .fcf data file although this format encodes symmetry operators directly rather than the space group.
  # Try using the right mouse button to pan across the map. You should see that the map is automatically re-contoured as you scroll across the main canvas and you move to the edge of the current box of map density.
  # The map size and contour levels can be changed using the *Contour Options…* command in the map’s menu which is accessed by right-clicking on the map in the *Models* view. Move the *Radius* scrollbar to change the size of the display density to a 9Å box. From the pull down menu in the *Preset Map Styles* list box select the first option - *Blue Map 1,2,3,4 5 sigma* – and click on OK. The lowest contour level for displaying this map is set to one sigma (Crystallographers refer to the root-mean-square density fluctuation of the map in terms of ‘sigma’, although this may be confusing as it does not relate to the error in the electron density for this type of map).  MIFit internally scales maps so that one sigma is set to 50 units.  The other density levels are initially set to 2 sigma, 3 sigma etc for up to 5 contour levels. 
  # Again select the *Contour Options…* in the map’s menu Try turning off contour levels 2 and 4 by removing the checks from the associated *Show* parameters. Click on OK and you should see these two intermediate contour levels disappear from the display, leaving a less cluttered image. 
  # Try changing the resolution of the map by selecting the *FFT Phases…* command in the map’s menu, setting the *Min Resolution* parameter to 3.0 and selecting OK. The operating default for the FFT had been set to create the map using the full resolution limits of the data but you should now see the map at 3Å resolution showing much less detail.  
  # Try changing the grid spacing for the map contours by selecting the *FFT Phases…* option again and changing the *Grid* option from the default (*Medium Grid*) to *Fine Grid*. Click on OK and you should see that the map is returned at the same resolution with a much smoother appearance. The *Medium Grid* setting is used for most model building activities since extra contour lines impede graphics performance and may make the model hard to see but presentation images sometimes look better when over-contoured on a fine grid.
  # Zoom out the model and select the *Show/Symmetry Atoms/Show symmetry atoms as atoms* command. You should see some symmetry related atoms (purple) appear around the molecule. Alternatively, you can use the *Show/Symmetry Atoms/Show symmetry atoms as CA trace* to see just a CA trace of the symmetry related model.
  # You may select *File/Close* or *File/Exit* to close this session or shut down MIFit.