#summary Tutorial Lesson: SAD phasing

= Tutorial Lesson: SAD phasing =

(This tutorial requires that MIFit has access to SHELXD and CCP4.)

Scenario: You have collected full data (i.e including anomalous differences) to 2.1Å on a Cr wavelength source from a new 318 amino acid protein that contains 10 sulfur atoms. You wish to compute an electron density map from this SAD data for model-building. This data was supplied by Aiping Dong (Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto) and corresponds to PDB entry 2AZP.

  # Copy file ano.sca from the examples directory of your MIFit installation into a new directory. This file contains the integrated and merged intensity data for the SAD phasing process.
  # Select the *Job/SAD Phasing* application from the MIFit interface.
  # Use the *Browse...* button to set the *Working directory* parameter to the directory created in (1).
  # Use the *Browse...* button to set the *Intensity* data parameter to the file ano.sca.
  # Since this is an entirely ab initio structure determination the method for determining *Scatter sites* should remain set to automatic. The *Scatter type* should remain set to S (sulfur), the *Number of sites* should be set to 10, the *Number of disulfides* should be set to 0, the Min scatterer separation parameter should remain set at 3.5Å.
  # Set the *Solvent fraction* parameter to 0.49 (the expected solvent volume for this protein size/crystal cell). The option to *Phase* from both site enantiomorphs is needed so that checkbox should remain selected and the option to *Change spacegroup number* should not be invoked. The *Site Refinement Method* option may remain set to *mlphare* to use the CCP4/MLPHARE program for site refinement.
  # Click on *OK* and the SAD phasing job should launch. The job will typically take 5-10 minutes (with most of the time spent running multiple site finding trials). Upon completion, a browser window will appear providing diagnostic information on the phase determination. For potentially successful phase determination the figures of merit should be greater than 0.30 in several resolution shells and most of the sites should have consistent occupancies and relatively low B-factors. In this example all sites have occupancies of ~1.0 with B-factors in the range 27-42Å2. The hand with the lowest density modification residual is more likely to be the correct solution (in a genuinely new example it is wise to inspect both maps).
  # Click on the *Jobs* tab near the top of the navigation tree. In the *Jobs List* you will see an icon representing the job (colored yellow for running, green for completed and red for failed). Right-click on the bottommost entry in the job list and select *Show Log File*. This action will provide a view of summary information from the structure superposition process. Note that this command is inaccessible until the job completes.
  # The simplest way to load maps for visual inspection is to make use of the pre-computed session files. Use the *Open Results...* command in the job’s menu which is accessed by right-clicking on the job in the *Jobs List*. In the *Open Job Results* dialog, the Load Session selection will already show the mi_sad.mlw file because it is the most recent .mlw file. Uncheck Load PDB and Load Data; they are not needed for this example. Click *OK*. The loaded session will display two maps: one map for phasing with hand 1, the original site constellation, and the other map for phasing from the inverted site constellation. The map contours are colored with different styles to distinguish them. They can be inspected separately by toggling each map on and off with the map’s Show/Hide command (accessed by right-clicking on the map in the Models tree). Here, the map corresponding to the hand with the lowest residual is correct.
  # You should search the map display in order to visually identify protein secondary structure features, indicative of an interpretable map.
  # You may select *File/Close* or *File/Exit* to close this session or shut down MIFit.